# Neural Network NOTES
---

- Neural Networks are great identifying patterns in data. As a classic example, if you wanted to predict housing prices, you could build a data set that maps features about houses (square feet, location, proximity to Caltrain, etc) onto their actual price, and then train a network to recognize the complex relationship between features and pricing. Training happens by feeding the network features, letting it make a guess about the price, and then correcting the guess (backpropagation).

- Convolutional Neural Networks work similarly, but with images. Instead of giving a CNN discrete features, you'll usually just use the pixels of the image itself. Through a series of layers, the CNN is able to build features itself (traditionally things like edges, corners) and learn patterns in image data. For example, a CNN might be trained on a dataset that maps images onto labels, and learn how to label new images on its own.

## What is a Neural Network
- It’s a technique for building a computer program that learns from data. It is based very loosely on how we think the human brain works. First, a collection of software “neurons” are created and connected together, allowing them to send messages to each other. Next, the network is asked to solve a problem, which it attempts to do over and over, each time strengthening the connections that lead to success and diminishing those that lead to failure. For a more detailed introduction to neural networks, Michael Nielsen’s Neural Networks and Deep Learning is a good place to start. For a more technical overview, try Deep Learning by Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. (Playground)[https://github.com/tensorflow/playground]